Feature/pub 1676 message annotations (#2642)
ably/docs: src/pages/docs/messages/annotations.mdx

| serial | This message's unique serial (lexicographically totally ordered). |
| messageSerial | The serial of the message that this annotation is annotating. |
| type | The [annotation type](#annotation-types). |
| name | The name of the annotation, used by some summarization methods for aggregation. See [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries). |
| clientId | The client identifier of the user that published this annotation. |
| count | An optional count, only relevant to certain summarization methods. See [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries) for more information. |
| data | An optional payload for the annotation. Available on an [individual annotation](#subscribe-individual-annotations) but not aggregated or included in [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries). |
| encoding | This is typically empty, as all messages received from Ably are automatically decoded client-side using this value. However, if the message encoding cannot be processed, this attribute contains the remaining transformations not applied to the `data` payload. |

> | timestamp | The timestamp of when the message was received by Ably, as milliseconds since the Unix epoch. |

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/2642/commits/28d43f4038d8037cde30d46dccab5e1dc921ab44

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

// Publish an annotation for a message that flags it as delivered
await channel.annotations.publish(message, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});

// You can also use a message's serial number
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1', 
  name: 'delivered'
});
```

```nodejs
// Create an Ably Realtime client specifying the clientId that will
// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

// Publish an annotation for a message that flags it as delivered
await channel.annotations.publish(message, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});

// You can also use a message's serial number
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1', 
  name: 'delivered'
});
```

> </Code>

Reviewer: this is character-for-character identical to the `javascript` code sample. I'm pretty sure you don't need both, I think we have a fallback waterfall defined so that it'll show the most relevant code sample that exists, and ofc that'd be javascript for nodejs? Mark can confirm

Author: That would be nice, @m-hulbert is there a way to do this?

<Code>
```javascript
await channel.subscribe((message) => {
  if (message.action === 'message.summary') {
    console.log(message.summary);
  }
});
```

```nodejs
await channel.subscribe((message) => {
  if (message.action === 'message.summary') {
    console.log(message.summary);
  }
});
```
</Code>

<Aside data-type="info">
When using message annotations, normal messages delivered to the [`subscribe()`](/docs/pub-sub#subscribe) listener will have an `action` of `message.create`.
</Aside>

For more details on summary structure and usage, see [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries).

### Subscribing to individual annotations <a id="subscribe-individual-annotations" />

For more fine-grained visibility, you can also subscribe directly to individual annotation events using the `annotations.subscribe()` method on a channel.

Annotations delivered to the `annotations.subscribe()` listener will have an `action` of `annotation.create` or `annotation.delete`.

<Code>
```javascript

> await channel.annotations.subscribe((annotation) => {  

Reviewer: The code example should include getting the channel with channeloptions that specify the annotation_subscribe mode

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/2642/commits/829b3a4044ec8199cd1e409aeb7599602dbd6e0c

</Aside>

## Annotation types <a id="annotation-types"/>

Annotation types determine how annotations are processed and aggregated into [summaries](#annotation-summaries).

The annotation type is a string of the format `namespace:summarization.version` where:

- `namespace` is a string (e.g. `reactions`) that groups related annotations. Only annotations in the same namespace will be aggregated together to produce [summaries](#annotation-summaries).
- `summarization` specifies the summarization method (e.g. `flag`) which determines how annotations are aggregated to produce [summaries](#annotation-summaries).
- `version` specifies the version component of the summarization method (e.g. `v1`), which allows for future changes to summarization behavior.

## Annotation summaries <a id="annotation-summaries"/>

When annotations for a message are published, Ably automatically generates a summary that provides an aggregated view of all annotations for that message.

A separate summary is produced for each distinct [annotation type](#annotation-types).

> The summarization method specified in the [annotation type](#annotation-types) determines how annotations in the same namespace for a given message are aggregated into a summary. A summary is constructed from the set of `annotation.create` and `annotation.delete` messages that have been published for a message.

Reviewer: Might be useful to give an example `summary` in a code block? Just to show that it's an object whose keys are the annotation types, which is obvious once you know it but isn't necessarily clear from reading the docs

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/2642/commits/8d7eb0c7375d20f078fc2a0133bddc4eec64c697

<Code>
```javascript
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered',
  data: 'Message delivered!'
});
```

```nodejs
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered',
  data: 'Message delivered!'
});
```
</Code>

### Subscribe to individual annotations <a id="subscribe-individual-annotations"/>

Subscribe to individual annotation events using the `annotations.subscribe()` method on a channel. To subscribe to individual annotations, you must request the `ANNOTATION_SUBSCRIBE` [mode](/docs/channels/options#modes).

Annotations delivered to the `annotations.subscribe()` listener will have an `action` of `annotation.create` or `annotation.delete`.

<Code>
```javascript
// Create an Ably Realtime client specifying the clientId that will
// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled.
// Specify the ANNOTATION_SUBSCRIBE mode to enable annotation subscriptions.

> const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example', { modes: ['ANNOTATION_SUBSCRIBE'] });

Reviewer 2: Good point. Annotated the code as suggested and also added a note into the text, similar to what we did for LiveObjects. 0b29a4e7ad0feae3404f290224b23010c0ed696e

<Aside data-type='experimental'>
Message annotations are currently Experimental. They are still in development and subject to rapid change.
</Aside>

Message annotations enable clients to add metadata to existing messages on a channel. You can use annotations to implement features like:

* **Message reactions** - add emoji reactions (👍, ❤️, 😂) to messages
* **Content categorization** - tag messages with categories such as "important" or "urgent"
* **Community moderation** - flag inappropriate content for review
* **Read receipts** - mark messages as "read" or "delivered"

When clients publish or delete an annotation, Ably automatically creates a [summary](#annotation-summaries) that provides an aggregated view of all annotations for that message.

## Enable annotations <a id="enable"/>

Annotations can be enabled for a channel or channel namespace with the *Message annotations, updates, and deletes* channel rule.

<Aside data-type='important'>
When message annotations are enabled, messages are [persisted](/docs/storage-history/storage#all-message-persistence) regardless of whether or not persistence is enabled, in order to support the feature. This may increase your package cost.

> [Continuous history](/docs/storage-history/history#continuous-history) features are not supported. Be aware that if you are currently using continuous history and enable annotations, updates, and deletes, continuous history will no longer function.

Reviewer: Neither, it's true until we do new-model live history, but we decided that that was not a requirement for annotations GA.

these bits originally said "will not work (yet)" but Mark [requested we remove that](https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/2642#discussion_r2397795126)

</Aside>

> 1. Go to the [**Settings**](https://ably.com/accounts/any/apps/any/edit) tab of an app in your dashboard.

Reviewer: I have no idea if that is in fact a possibility; the [website pr](https://github.com/ably/website/pull/7173) claimed to implement for the control api but the [schema](https://ably.com/docs/api/control-api?#tag/namespaces/paths/~1apps~1%7Bapp_id%7D~1namespaces/get) does not show any such field. I've asked matt A.

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

// Publish an annotation for a message that flags it as delivered
await channel.annotations.publish(message, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});

// You can also use a message's `serial`
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});
```
</Code>

In the case of the `distinct`, `unique`, or `multiple` aggregation types, you should also specify a `name`. For these types, each different name will be aggregated separately in the [annotation summary](#annotation-summaries).

In the case of the `multiple` aggregation type, you should specify both a `name` and a `count`, by which to increment a client's contribution to the summary.

<Code>
```javascript
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'rating:multiple.v1',
  name: 'stars',
  count: 4
});
```

```nodejs
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'rating:multiple.v1',
  name: 'stars',
  count: 4
});
```
</Code>

> You can additionally specify a `data` payload when publishing an annotation. This is not included in an annotation summary, so only readable by someone [subscribing to individual annotation events](#individual-annotations).

Reviewer 3: someone subscribing -> clients that are subscribed

---
title: Message Annotations
meta_description: "Annotate messages on a channel with additional metadata."
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
---

<Aside data-type='experimental'>
Message Annotations is currently Experimental. Its features are still in development and subject to rapid change.
</Aside>

Message annotations allow clients to add metadata to existing messages on a channel. You can use annotations to implement features like:

- **Message reactions** - Add emoji reactions (👍, ❤️, 😂) to messages
- **Content categorization** - Tag messages with categories like "important" or "urgent"
- **Community moderation** - Flag inappropriate content for review
- **Read receipts** - Mark messages as "read" or "delivered"

> When clients publish or delete annotations, Ably automatically creates a [summary](#annotation-summaries) that provides an aggregated view of all annotations for a message.

Reviewer: I assume mike fixed this, looks like we now describe annotation types starting line33

## Enable annotations <a id="enable"/>

Annotations can be enabled for a channel or channel namespace with the *Advanced message features* channel rule.

<Aside data-type='important'>
Note that when advanced messaging is enabled, messages are [persisted](/docs/storage-history/storage#all-message-persistence) by default, and [continuous history](/docs/storage-history/history#continuous-history) features are not currently supported.
</Aside>

1. On your [dashboard](https://ably.com/accounts/any), select one of your apps.
2. Go to **Settings**.
3. Under [channel rules](/docs/channels#rules), click **Add new rule**.
4. Enter the channel name or channel namespace on which to enable message annotations.
5. Check **Advanced message features** to enable message annotations.
6. Click **Create channel rule** to save.

> ## Annotation properties <a id="annotation-properties"/>

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest we move this below publish / subscribe as it's not really the first thing you need to know, or understand.

await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1', 
  name: 'delivered'
});
```
</Code>

You can also specify a payload on the `data` field when publishing an annotation. While the `data` payload is available on the [individual annotation](#subscribe-individual-annotations) events, it is not included in [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries).

<Code>
```javascript
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1', 
  name: 'delivered',
  data: 'Message delivered!'
});
```

```nodejs
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1', 
  name: 'delivered',
  data: 'Message delivered!'
});
```
</Code>

When using the `multiple.v1` summarization method you can optionally specify a `count` by which to increment this client's contribution to the summary:

<Code>
```javascript
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'rating:multiple.v1',
  name: 'stars',
  count: 4
});
```

```nodejs
await channel.annotations.publish(message.serial, {
  type: 'rating:multiple.v1',
  name: 'stars',
  count: 4
});
```
</Code>

## Deleting annotations <a id="delete" />

> To delete a published annotation, use the `annotations.delete()` method on a channel, passing either a [message](/docs/messages) instance or the `serial` of the message to annotate. This method will publish a delete annotation message with an action of `annotation.delete`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To delete a published annotation, use the `annotations.delete()` method on a channel, passing either a [message](/docs/messages) instance or the `serial` of the message annotation to delete. This method will publish an annotation with the action `annotation.delete`.
```

Deleting an annotation does not remove the original annotation that was published. Instead, annotation delete messages affect the [annotation summary](#annotation-summaries) for that message by removing the contribution as specified by the delete annotation.

The `clientId` specified in the [client options](/docs/api/realtime-sdk#client-options) will be associated with the published delete annotation.

<Aside data-type='note'>
Some summarization methods require the client to be identified with a `clientId` in order to delete annotations. For more information, see [annotation summaries](#annotation-summaries).

> </Aside>

Reviewer 2: Is this necessary to repeat/include?

// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

// Delete a 'delivered' annotation
await channel.annotations.delete(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});
```

```nodejs
// Create an Ably Realtime client specifying the clientId that will
// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

// Delete a 'delivered' annotation
await channel.annotations.delete(message.serial, {
  type: 'receipts:flag.v1',
  name: 'delivered'
});
```
</Code>

## Subscribing to annotation updates <a id="subscribe" />

There are two ways to subscribe to annotation updates:

1. **Annotation summaries** (recommended) - Receive aggregated summaries of all annotations for a message
2. **Individual annotations** - Receive individual events when annotations are published or deleted

### Subscribing to annotation summaries <a id="subscribe-annotation-summaries" />

> The recommended way to receive annotation updates is through annotation summaries. These events provide a summary of the complete, current state of all annotations for a message whenever annotations are published or deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended way to receive annotation updates is through annotation summaries. These events provide a summary of the complete, current state of all annotations for a message whenever an annotation is published or deleted for that message.
```

Annotation summaries are delivered to subscribers as messages with an `action` of `message.summary`. These messages have a `summary` field which provides a summary of all the annotations for the message identified by the `serial` field on the summary message.

> The value of the `summary` field is an object where the keys are the [annotation types](#annotation-types). The exact structure of the value of each key depends on the [summarization method](#annotation-summaries) specified in the annotation type.

Reviewer 2: `summary` doesn't exist in the table describing the properties of an annotation message.

// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

await channel.subscribe((message) => {
  if (message.action === 'message.summary') {
    console.log(message.summary);
  }
});
```

```nodejs
// Create an Ably Realtime client specifying the clientId that will
// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled 
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example');

await channel.subscribe((message) => {
  if (message.action === 'message.summary') {
    console.log(message.summary);
  }
});
```
</Code>

<Aside data-type="info">
When using message annotations, normal messages delivered to the [`subscribe()`](/docs/pub-sub#subscribe) listener will have an `action` of `message.create`.

> </Aside>

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this should be part of the intro section, but more importantly clearly state that annotation (summaries) use the same listener as regular messages on the channel. WDYT?

  }
});
```

```nodejs
// Create an Ably Realtime client specifying the clientId that will
// be associated with annotations published by this client
const realtime = new Ably.Realtime({ key: '{{API_KEY}}', clientId: 'my-client-id' });

// Create a channel in a namespace called `annotations`
// which has message annotations enabled.
// Specify the ANNOTATION_SUBSCRIBE mode to enable annotation subscriptions.
const channel = realtime.channels.get('annotations:example', { modes: ['ANNOTATION_SUBSCRIBE'] });

await channel.annotations.subscribe((annotation) => {  
  if (annotation.action === 'annotation.create') {
    console.log(`New ${annotation.type} annotation with name ${annotation.name} from ${annotation.clientId}`);
  } else if (annotation.action === 'annotation.delete') {
    console.log(`${annotation.clientId} deleted a ${annotation.type} annotation with name ${annotation.name}`);
  }
});
```
</Code>

<Aside data-type='note'>
Individual annotation events are useful for activity feeds or detailed logging, but for maintaining UI state, summary events are generally more reliable and efficient.

> </Aside>

Reviewer 2: I'd pull this up into the intro of the section and out of the aside.

Reviewer: I'm rewriting this para. "More reliable" is not right (receiving raw annotations is perfectly reliable)

> ## Annotation types <a id="annotation-types"/>

Reviewer 2: Would this work better as part of publishing an annotation considering that's the point you need to set the type?

<Code>
```json
{
  "metrics:total.v1": {
    "total": 42
  },
  "reactions:flag.v1": {
    "total": 3,
    "clientIds": ["client1", "client2", "client3"]
  },
  "categories:distinct.v1": {
    "important": {
      "total": 2,
      "clientIds": ["client1", "client3"]
    },
    "urgent": {
      "total": 3,
      "clientIds": ["client1", "client2", "client3"]
    }
  },
  "status:unique.v1": {
    "important": {
      "total": 2,
      "clientIds": ["client1", "client3"]
    },
    "urgent": {
      "total": 1,
      "clientIds": ["client2"]
    }
  },
  "voting:multiple.v1": {
    "option-a": {
      "total": 7,
      "clientCounts": {
        "client1": 3,
        "client2": 2
      },
      "totalUnidentified": 2
    },
    "option-b": {
      "total": 4,
      "clientCounts": {
        "client1": 2,
        "client3": 1
      },
      "totalUnidentified": 1
    }
  }
}
```
</Code>

When [publishing](#publish) an annotation you can optionally specify a `name` which is used by some summarization methods to produce a summary.

Ably provides five summarization methods to support different use cases which are described below.

> ### Total

Reviewer 2: I wonder if these should be listed before the payload example, as they're key to understanding what type of annotation you can publish.

The `total.v1` summarization method counts the number of annotations of a given type that were [published](#publish) for a message.

[Deleting](#delete) an annotation decrements the total count for that message.

The `total.v1` summarization method does not attribute counts to individual clients in the summary; it maintains only a simple count per [annotation type](#annotation-types) and does not organize counts by name.

If the same client publishes an annotation of a given type to the same message twice, the `total` count is incremented twice.

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: Missing `<Code>` tags on the last few codeblocks of the page.
